Add article about changes in coin selection module (#114)
bitcoindevkit/bitcoindevkit.org: docs/_blog/improving_coin_selection_in_BDK.md

---
title: "Improving coin selection in BDK"
description: "A brief description of the work done in the coin selection module in BDK during Summer of Bitcoin 2022"
date: "2022-08-17"
tags: ["coin_selection", "BDK", "development", "summer_of_bitcoin"]
authors:
  - "César Alvarez Vallero"
hidden: true
draft: false
---

> As a project designed to use as a build tool in wallet development, one of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a project designed to be used as a build tool in wallet development, one of the
```

main things that BDK provides is the coin selection module. The purpose of the
module is to select the group of utxos to use as inputs for the transaction.
When you coin select you must consider cost, size and traceability.

- What are those costs?

>   Principally fees. Determined by the satisfaction size required by each of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Principally fees determined by the satisfaction size required by each of the
```

>   inputs. But are also related to the change outputs generated. Change outputs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  inputs. But the costs are also related to the change outputs generated. Change outputs
```

  are not part of the inputs, but they must be considered during coin selection

>   because it affects the fee rate of the transaction and will be used in future

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  because they affect the fee rate of the transaction and will be used in future
```

  transactions as inputs.

>   For example, if you create change outputs always that you have some excess

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  For example, if you always create change outputs when you have some excess
```

  the UTXO, the greater the proportion of fees spend to use that UTXO, depending
  on the fee rate.

- What do we mean by "size" considerations?

  Here we are not referring to the size in MB of the transaction, as that is
  addressed by the associated fees.
  Here, "size" is the number of new UTXOs created by each transaction. It has a
  direct impact on the size of the UTXO set maintained by each node.

- What is this traceability thing?

  Certain companies sell services whose purpose is to link address with their
  owners, harming the fungibility of some bitcoins and attacking the privacy of
  the users.
  There are some things that coin selection can do to make privacy leaking
  harder. For example, not creating change outputs, avoiding mixing UTXOs
  belonging to different owned addresses in the same transaction, or the total
  expenditure of the related utxos.

Besides the algorithm you use to coin select, which can target some of the
things described above, other code changes also have implications for them. The
following section will describe some of those changes and why they have been
done or could be added.

## Waste

> One of the  changes projected for the `coin_selection` module is the addition

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of my project changes for the `coin_selection` module is the addition
```

of the `Waste` metric, and its use to optimize the coin selection in relation
to the fee costs.

Waste is a metric introduced by the BnB algorithm as part of its bounding
procedure. Later, it was included as a high-level function to use in comparison
of different coin selection algorithms in Bitcoin Core.

### How it works?

We can describe waste as the sum of two values: creation cost and timing cost.

Timing cost is the cost associated with the current fee rate and some long-term
fee rate used as a threshold to consolidate UTXOs. It can be negative if the
current fee rate is cheaper than the long-term fee rate or zero if they are
equal. 

Creation cost is the cost associated with the surplus of coins besides the
transaction amount and transaction fees. It can happen in the form of a change
output or excessive fees paid to the miner.
Change cost derives from the cost of adding the extra output to the transaction

> and spending in the future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and spending it in the future.
```

Excess happens when there is no change, and the surplus of coins is spent as
part of the fees to the miner.

The creation cost can be zero if there is a perfect match as a result of the
coin selection algorithm.

So, waste can be zero or negative if the creation cost is zero and the timing
cost is less than or equal to zero

> You can read its technical aspects in its [PR](https://github.com/bitcoindevkit/bdk/pull/558). Comments and suggestions are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can read about the technical details in [bdk PR 558](https://github.com/bitcoindevkit/bdk/pull/558). Comments and suggestions are
```

welcome!

> But, while developing the proposal, some requirements to resolve before arose.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But, while developing the proposal, some requirements to resolve first arose.
```

    let drain_output_len = serialize(drain_script).len() + 8usize;
    let change_fee = fee_rate.fee_vb(drain_output_len);
    let drain_val = remaining_amount.saturating_sub(change_fee);

    if drain_val.is_dust(drain_script) {
        let dust_threshold = drain_script.dust_value().as_sat();
        Excess::NoChange {
            dust_threshold,
            change_fee,
            remaining_amount,
        }
    } else {
        Excess::Change {
            amount: drain_val,
            fee: change_fee,
        }
    }
}
```

To pass this new value to `Wallet::create_tx` and make decisions based on it,
the field `excess` was added to the `CoinSelectionResult`, and the
`coin_select` methods of each algorithm were adapted to compute this value,
using `decide_change` after performing the coin selection.

```rust
/// Result of a successful coin selection
pub struct CoinSelectionResult {
    /// List of outputs selected for use as inputs
    pub selected: Vec<Utxo>,
    /// Total fee amount for the selected utxos in satoshis
    pub fee_amount: u64,
    /// Remaining amount after deducing fees and outgoing outputs
    pub excess: Excess,
}
```

### Work in progress

> There persists unresolved yet the necessity to integrate the `Waste::calculate`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There remains unresolved the work to integrate the `Waste::calculate`
```

method with the `CoinSelectionAlgorithm` implementations and the
`decide_change` function.

The first step in that direction would be the removal of the Database generic
parameter from the `CoinSelectionAlgorithm` trait. There isn't a clear way to
make it, as you may guess by this
[issue](https://github.com/bitcoindevkit/bdk/issues/281).
The only algorithm currently using the database features is
`OldestFirstCoinSelection`.

> There is a proposal to fix this problem by removing the need of a database

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is a proposal to fix this problem by removing the need for a database
```

trait altogether, so, in the meanwhile, we could move the generic from the
trait to the `OldestFirstCoinSelection`, to avoid doing work that will probably
be disposed in the future.

> Another step in that way is a proposal to add a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another step in that direction is a proposal to add a
```

`CoinSelectionAlgorithm::get_selection` wrapper to the coin selection module,
which will join together preprocessing and validation of the utxos, coin
selection, the decision to create change and the calculus of waste in the same
function. The idea is to create a real pipeline to build a
`CoinSelectionResult`.

In addition, the function will allow the separation of the algorithms
`BranchAndBound` and `SingleRandomDraw` from each other, which were put
together only by the dependence of the former on the second one as a fallback
method.
That dependence will not be broken, but the possibility to use

> `SingleRandomDraw` through BDK for their purpose will be left open, expanding

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`SingleRandomDraw` through BDK will be enabled, expanding
```

the flexibility of the library.

> As a bonus, this function will deflate some parts of the code from unnecessary

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a bonus, this function will save some parts of the code from unnecessary
```

information, avoid code duplication (and all the things associated with it) and
provide a simple interface to integrate your custom algorithms with all the
other functionalities of the BDK library, enhancing them through the new change

> primitives and the computation of Waste.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
primitives and the computation of `Waste`.
```

> You can start reviewing the [PR](https://github.com/bitcoindevkit/bdk/pull/727) right now!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can start reviewing [bdk PR 727](https://github.com/bitcoindevkit/bdk/pull/727) right now!
```

## Further Improvements

Besides the `Waste` metric, there are other changes that could improve the
current state of the coin selection module in BDK, which will impact the
privacy and the flexibility provided by it.

### Privacy

In Bitcoin Core, the term `Output Group` is associated with a structure that
joins all the UTXOs belonging to a certain ScriptPubKey, up to a specified
threshold. The idea behind this is to reduce the address footprint in the
blockchain, reducing traceability and improving privacy.
In BDK, OutputGroups are a mere way to aggregate metadata to UTXOs. But this
structure can be improved to something like what there is in Bitcoin, by

> transforming the weighted utxos in a vector of them and adding a new field or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
transforming the weighted utxos into a vector of them and adding a new field or
```

parameter to control the amount stored in the vector.

### Flexibility

A further tweak in the UTXO structure could be the transition to traits, which
define the minimal properties accepted by the algorithms to select the
underlying UTXOs.
The hope is that anyone can define new algorithms consuming any form of UTXO
wrapper that you can imagine, as long as they follow the behavior specified by
those primitive traits.

Also, there is a major architectural change proposal called `bdk_core` that
will refactor a lot of sections of BDK to improve its modularity and
flexibility. If you want to know more, you can read the
[blog post](https://bitcoindevkit.org/blog/bdk-core-pt1/) about it or dig
directly into its [prototype](https://github.com/LLFourn/bdk_core_staging).

## Conclusion

A lot of work is coming to the coin selection module of BDK.

> Adding the Waste metric would be a great step in the improvement of the coin

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adding the `Waste` metric will be a great step in the improvement of the coin
```

selection features of the kit, and we hope to find new ways to measure the
selection capabilities. We are open to new ideas!
The new changes range from refactorings to enhancements. It's not hard to find
something to do in the project, as long as you spend some time figuring out how
the thing works. Hopefully, these new changes will make this task easier. And

> we are ready to help if you need to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
we are ready to help anyone who needs it.
```

If you would like to improve something, request a new feature or discuss how

> would you use BDK in your personal project, join us on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you would use BDK in your personal project, join us on
```

[Discord](https://discord.gg/dstn4dQ).

## Acknowledgements

> Special thanks to my mentor Daniela Brozzoni for the support and help provided

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Special thanks to my mentor [Daniela Brozzoni](https://github.com/danielabrozzoni) for the support and help provided
```

during the development of the above work.

Thanks to all BDK contributors for their reviews and comments and thanks to the
Bitcoin community for the open source work that made this an enjoyable learning
experience.

> Finally, thanks to the Summer of Bitcoin organizers, sponsors and speakers for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, thanks to the [Summer of Bitcoin](https://www.summerofbitcoin.org/) organizers, sponsors and speakers for
```
